---
title: Virtual Workshop Series for Harnessing the Power of Data to Advance Immune-mediated
  and Infectious Disease Research
author: ''
date: '2021-04-09'
slug: NIAID
categories:
  - event
  - seminar
tags:
  - health-research
banner: "img/banners/niaid-logo.png"
  
---

## Description

The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) is excited to advance discovery and innovation in infectious diseases and immune-mediated disorders research by leveraging data and data science approaches. Towards this end, NIAID will conduct a series of ideas and innovation webinars that bring together experts and stakeholders in data science, infectious diseases, immunology, and immune-mediated disorders.

Through the webinar series, participants will have the opportunity to provide insights into the current landscape of data science research and development, as well as offer ideas that promise to shape the future of data-driven immune-mediated and infectious disease research. The webinar series will serve as a platform for collaboration, idea generation, and networking among participants and generate foundational materials that is expected to inform the prospective role of data science in advancing NIAID’s mission.

**SECOND EVENT**: Ethical, Legal, and Social Implications of Harnessing Data to Advance Immune-Mediated and Infectious Disease Research

**WHEN**:  April 16th, 2021 2-3:30 pm ET

**WHERE**: Virtually hosted on Zoom - register to receive meeting link

**REGISTRATION**:  https://zoom.us/webinar/register/WN_RRefGTnQQWaevB__VdjL4w 

**AGENDA**: https://apply.hub.ki/datascience4niaid/

**WHAT**: Our expert panel will engage in a moderated discussion following short talks where they offer perspectives in the evolving landscape of ethical, legal, and social implications of harnessing data to advance immune-mediated and infectious disease research.

**WHO**: Invited Speakers include Ms. Megan Doerr (Sage Bionetworks), Dr. Bradley Malin (Vanderbilt University), Dr. Alexandra L. Phelan (Georgetown University). Moderated by Dr. Stephany Duda (Vanderbilt University) and Dr. Purvesh Khatri (Stanford University).

**CONTACTS**: Event Organizing Committee (NIAIDODSET@niaid.nih.gov)
