---
title: 'Rs tapply() in Julia'
author: Edward A. Roualdes
date: '2021-09-20'
categories:
  - learning
tags:
  - R
  - Julia
  - tapply
slug: tapply
banner: img/RtoJulia.png
---

# Motivation

Lately, I, Edward, have been programming in
[Julia](https://julialang.org/) a lot. Two times in the last week, I’ve
needed a function like R’s `tapply()`, but in Julia. With a little bit
of searching around the interwebs, I hacked together a reasonable
equivalent to R’s `tapply()` written in Julia. This blog post will
explain the function `tapply()` and briefly introduce the two examples
where I used `tapply()`. Last, I’ll provide my Julia code which
replicates R’s `tapply()` function.

# R’s tapply()

R’s function `tapply()` is a tricky little guy, but only at first. Let’s
start with just a few examples to get an understanding of the function
`tapply()`.

First we define a vector `x` of some made-up data and another vector `g`
that assigns elements of `x` to the groups in `g`. In our first example,
`g` contains five groups, `A, B, C, D, E`.

    x <- c( 1,   2,   3,   4,   5,   6,   7,   8,   9,   10)
    g <- c("A", "A", "B", "B", "C", "C", "C", "D", "E", "E")

The first four elements of `x` are evenly split amongst the first two
groups of `g`, namely groups `A` and `B`. The fifth through seventh
elements of `x` belong to group `C`, while elements `9,10` belong to
group `E`. Lonely element `8` belongs to its own group, `D`.

Let’s see `tapply()` in action.

    tapply(x, g, length)

    ## A B C D E 
    ## 2 2 3 1 2

By picking simple vectors like `x,g` and a simpler function like
`length()` we can start to see what `tapply()` does. In this case,
`tapply()` calculates the length all of the elements of `x` as grouped
by `g`.

Let’s try a more abstract phrasing: `tapply()` applies the function
`length()` to the elements of `x` as grouped by `g`.

`tapply()` is quite general. It doesn’t only calculate lengths of
grouped elements. One more step up in abstraction: `tapply()` applies a
function to the elements of `x` as grouped by `g`. This arbitrary
function gets passed in as the third argument to `tapply()`.

Here is our last attempt at an abstract phrase to define what `tapply()`
does: “Apply a function to each cell of a ragged array…”. Ok, this last
one is a bit confusing because it introduces a new phrase, ragged array.
In R, arrays are vectors. A ragged vector is just a (outer) vector of
(inner) vectors, so a vector that holds vectors, where the inner vectors
can be of different lengths. Outside of R, these are sometimes called
[jagged arrays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jagged_array).

I put the last phrase in quotes, because I stole it directly from the
help file for `tapply()`. Try `?tapply()` at the Console in R. It helps
to know what `tapply()` does before reading this help file :)

Let’s consider the ragged vector that is implicitly defined by
`tapply()` in the case of our simpler example above. The inner vectors
looks like

    xA <- c(1, 2) # the elements of x as defined by g's group A 
    xB <- c(3, 4)
    xC <- c(5, 6, 7)
    xD <- c(8)
    xE <- c(9, 10)

With these inner vectors, we can now “apply” the function `length()` to
each.

    length(xA)

    ## [1] 2

    length(xB)

    ## [1] 2

    length(xC)

    ## [1] 3

    length(xD)

    ## [1] 1

    length(xE)

    ## [1] 2

So `tapply()` is implicitly creating a ragged vector that holds
`xA, xB, xC, xD, xE`. I say implicitly here, because such a ragged
vector is never realized; inside `tapply()`, `length()` is applied to
each inner vector without creating the outer vector.

# Practice

Try replacing the function `length()` above with the function `sum()`.
As a challenge, think about your answer before asking starting to type.
What will the output of the following code be?

    tapply(x, g, sum)

# Two Examples

In the last week, I’ve needed a function like R’s `tapply()` while
programming in Julia. The two example below are simplified versions of
where this function `tapply()` showed up.

## Example 1

In fact, the first time this came up for me was for a sub-problem that
involved the practice problem above. I wanted to sum elements of a
vector as grouped by another vector. My sub-problem involved groups as
defined by integers instead of letters, but that’s no issue for
`tapply()`.

    h <- c(1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 5, 5)
    tapply(x, h, sum)

    ##  1  2  3  4  5 
    ##  3  7 18  8 19

Since this example is no different than above, I’ll provide some more
details of the broader problem I was working on. While working on a
non-[DSL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-specific_language)
version of [Stan](https://mc-stan.org/), I was attempting to take a
derivative of something like a [random effects linear
model](https://norcalbiostat.github.io/AppliedStatistics_notes/RI.html)
with respect to the random intercept. As it turns out, such a derivative
needs the sum of the intercepts as grouped by their unique ID.

# Example 2

This next example is a not obvious use-case of `tapply()`, even if the
original task seemed easy. I was asked by a colleague to read through a
bunch of Excel files (about 25) and print out some integers (about
17,000 integers) in a “pretty” format. For example, with the integers

    y <- c(1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 13)

my colleague wanted them printed out as “1 - 3, 6, 7, 9 - 11, 13”.
Essentially the task was to hyphenate consecutive integers and
comma-separate everything.

So here it goes, using `tapply()`. First, I define the function which
will be applied to each inner vector. Notice that if my function `f()`
simply returned the variable `l` then it would be equivalent to using
`length()` in place of `f()`. Instead, my function `f()` returns
appropriately formatted strings.

    f <- function(x) {
      l <- length(x)
      if (l == 1) {
        return(paste0(x))
      } else if(l == 2) {
        return(paste0(x[1], ", ",  x[l]))
      } else {
        return(paste0(x[1], " - ", x[l]))
      }
    }

    groups <- cumsum(c(1, diff(y) != 1))
    tapply(y, groups, f)

    ##        1        2        3        4 
    ##  "1 - 3"   "6, 7" "9 - 11"     "13"

So close! But let’s take a step back, because from here it’s not too
bad. Consider the vector `groups`, printed alongside `y`.

    y

    ## [1]  1  2  3  6  7  9 10 11 13

    groups

    ## [1] 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 3 4

Notice that it’s doing exactly what we want; defining groups by
consecutive numbers: `1, 2, 3` all get assigned to group `1`, `6,7` get
assigned to group `2`, `9,10,11` are assigned to `3`, and lonely `13`
assigned to group `4`. How?!

The function `diff()` calculates the difference between consecutive
values in its argument. When applied to `y` specifically, it returns, in
one vector, `y[2] - y[1]`, `y[3] - y[2]`, `y[4] - y[3]`, and so on.
That’s nearly what we want, but we need to account for two extra bits.

First, `diff()` alone is insufficient. We want to know, more
specifically, when the differences are equal to 1, since this inherently
defines consecutive integers. So `diff(y) != 1` returns a vector of `1`s
and `0`s. The cumulative sum of these is nearly what we want.

Second, `diff(y)` returns a vector of length `length(y) - 1` since it
starts working on `y[2]`. To account for this we prepend a `1` to the
`cumsum()`ed vector.

Let’s store our output into a vector.

    s <- tapply(y, groups, f)

The vector `s` in now a vector of the strings we want.

    s

    ##        1        2        3        4 
    ##  "1 - 3"   "6, 7" "9 - 11"     "13"

Since we want only one string, not a vector of strings, we combine these
into a single, comma-separated string.

    paste(s, collapse = ", ")

    ## [1] "1 - 3, 6, 7, 9 - 11, 13"

For your sake, I leave out the details of repeatedly applying `tapply()`
like this to some 25 Excel files. Your welcome.

# tapply() in Julia

We build up to `tapply()` by solving a number of sub-problems.

## tabulate values

In order to efficiently run a function like `tapply()`, I want a count
of how many times each distinct value appears in a vector. R calls such
a function table. Let’s first load up Julia and share with Julia some of
the vectors we’ve been using in our examples.

    library(JuliaCall)
    julia_assign("x", x)

    ## Julia version 1.5.0 at location C:\Users\rache\AppData\Roaming\R\data\R\JULIAC~1\julia\V15~1.0\bin will be used.

    ## Loading setup script for JuliaCall...

    ## Finish loading setup script for JuliaCall.

    julia_assign("g", g)
    julia_assign("y", y)
    julia_assign("groups", groups)

I called my version of this function table in Julia, too. Here’s the
source code, much of which I borrowed from the Julia package
[StatsBase.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/StatsBase.jl),

    function table(x::Vector)
        d = Dict{eltype(x), Int}()
        for v in x
            idx = Base.ht_keyindex2!(d, v)
            if idx > 0
                @inbounds d.vals[idx] += 1
            else
                @inbounds Base._setindex!(d, 1, v, -idx)
            end
        end
        return d
    end

    ## table (generic function with 1 method)

So now we can call our Julia function.

    table(g)

    ## Dict{String,Int64} with 5 entries:
    ##   "B" => 2
    ##   "A" => 2
    ##   "C" => 3
    ##   "D" => 1
    ##   "E" => 2

Because Julia doesn’t inherently have a table type, I used a dictionary.

Next, I wrote a function which I named `group`. This is equivalent to
R’s `split()`. Since Julia already has a function named split, I chose a
different name.

    function group(x::Vector, g::Vector)
        gt = eltype(g)
        gt <: Number && gt != Int && (g = convert.(Int, g))
        t = table(g)
        d = Dict(k => Vector{eltype(x)}(undef, v) for (k, v) in t)
        ug = collect(keys(t))
        u = gt <: Number ? ug : Dict(k => i for (i, k) in pairs(ug))
        c = zeros(Int, length(d))
        @inbounds for i in eachindex(g, x)
            gi = g[i]
            ui = u[gi]
            c[ui] += 1
            d[gi][c[ui]] = x[i]
        end
        return d
    end

    ## group (generic function with 1 method)

The function `group()` groups the elements of `x` into groups based on
the groups defined in `g`.

    group(x, g)

    ## Dict{String,Array{Float64,1}} with 5 entries:
    ##   "B" => [3.0, 4.0]
    ##   "A" => [1.0, 2.0]
    ##   "C" => [5.0, 6.0, 7.0]
    ##   "D" => [8.0]
    ##   "E" => [9.0, 10.0]

Let’s compare this to what R’s function `split()` does. The order is not
the same, so take a second to convince yourself the grouped elements of
`x` appropriately match.

    split(x, g)

    ## $A
    ## [1] 1 2
    ## 
    ## $B
    ## [1] 3 4
    ## 
    ## $C
    ## [1] 5 6 7
    ## 
    ## $D
    ## [1] 8
    ## 
    ## $E
    ## [1]  9 10

Finally, here is an equivalent to `tapply()`, which I named `mapg()`
(think map groups). I also added an option to first sort the groups in
`g`, just in case that proves helpful (which it did, in the details of
the second example). Notice that I changed the order of the arguments to
better match the order of the arguments to Julia’s function `map()`,
namely the function to be applied to the groups comes first.

    function mapg(f, x, g; sortfirst = false)
        v = collect(group(x, g))
        z = sortfirst ? sort(v, by = x -> first(x)) : v
        return map(y -> f(last(y)), z)
    end

    ## mapg (generic function with 1 method)

Let’s use `mapg()` to print out some integers in a “pretty” format.

    function f(x)
      lx = length(x)
      out = ""
      if lx == 1
        out *= "$(x[1])"
      else
        out *= lx == 2 ? "$(x[1]), $(x[2])" : "$(x[1]) - $(x[end])"
      end
      return out
    end

    ## f (generic function with 1 method)


    s = mapg(f, y, groups, sortfirst = true)

    ## 4-element Array{String,1}:
    ##  "1.0 - 3.0"
    ##  "6.0, 7.0"
    ##  "9.0 - 11.0"
    ##  "13.0"

    join(s, ", ")

    ## "1.0 - 3.0, 6.0, 7.0, 9.0 - 11.0, 13.0"

If you are following along, try calling `mapg()` without the
`sortfirst = true` argument to better understand how sorting helps.

# So What?

Well, I certainly learned some more about Julia by writing the function
`mapg()`. And I certainly merged some relatively different problems down
to one function, that’s always fun! But moreover, R’s function
`tapply()` is a classic example of the [two language
problem](https://thebottomline.as.ucsb.edu/2018/10/julia-a-solution-to-the-two-language-programming-problem);
`tapply()` uses some underlying functions which are written in C,
`factor()` and `split()` (possibly others). While my function `mapg()`
might not be the fastest re-writing of `tapply()` that is possible in
Julia, it is still fast. Recall, `tapply()` does most of the heavy
lifting in C.

Here’s a crude and imperfect (aren’t they all?) benchmark. In each
language, I find the minimum run time, across three runs, of `tapply()`
and `mapg()`, applied to a randomly sampled vector of 10^{6} standard
Normal data grouped first into 26 groups defined by uniformly sampling
letters from the English alphabet and then grouped into the integers 1
to 50, also uniformly sampled. All times are reported in seconds. First,
in R.

    timeit <- function(gidx) {
      set.seed(54231184)
      N <- 1e6
      xx <- rnorm(N)
      gg <- sample(gidx, N, replace = TRUE)
      mintime <- Inf
      for (j in 1:3) {
        time <- system.time(tapply(xx, gg, sum))[1]
        if (time < mintime) mintime <- time
      }
      return(mintime)
    }

    timeit(letters)

    ## user.self 
    ##      0.04

    timeit(1:50)

    ## user.self 
    ##      0.01

Next, in Julia.

    using Random

    function timeit(gidx)
      Random.seed!(54231184)
      N = convert(Int, 1e6)
      xx = randn(N)
      gg = rand(gidx, N)
      mintime = Inf
      for j in 1:3
        time = @elapsed mapg(sum, xx, gg)
        time < mintime && (mintime = time)
      end
      return mintime
    end

    ## timeit (generic function with 1 method)


    timeit('a':'z')

    ## 0.036550301

    timeit(1:50)

    ## 0.0226102

My function `mapg()` appears to be on par with R’s `tapply()`, at least
within this narrow benchmark.

An implementation using a [radix sorting
algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix_sort) might prove faster
than my use of a dictionary in `table()`. Though it might also depend on
the number of groups. Maybe another blog post?

# Conclusion

In this blog post, we discussed the function `tapply()`, showcased some
examples, and then dove head first into some fairly serious Julia code.
It all started out fun and games, until the end :) Hopefully you learned
some use-cases of an occasionally helpful function, namely `tapply()`,
and got a chance to think about its underlying implementation.

_Image credit [R](https://cran.r-project.org/) and [Julia](https://julialang.org/)_